---
layout: default
title: Organic Biogeochemistry
category: about
---

Organic biogeochemistry is the study of  biologically-produced molecules that can carry information about living organisms into the sedimentary and geological records.

DNA is the information-carrying biomolecule. It is heritable, and encodes all the genes that can be expressed by an organism. Its information content is high, but its preservation potential is relatively low;  under ideal conditions it may be preserved in environments for a few thousands or tens of thousands of years. Genomic DNA sequences are increasingly stored in databases such as GenBank. These databases may be queried for genes encoding synthesis of lipids - if the genes are known!

RNA is synthesized during gene expression. It is also used to build the ribosome. Like DNA, it contains sequence information, but it also carries information about the expression level of each gene. However, RNA is very unstable and is rarely preserved in the environment for more than a few minutes.

Protein is constructed of sequences of amino acids and is the major building block of enzymes. Amino acid sequences contain information, although less than DNA or RNA. It also contains expression information that can be preserved over moderate timescales: at least as long as DNA, and possibly much longer.

Lipids don't carry as much information as DNA, RNA, or protein. Unlike these other molecules lipids are not information-encoding polymers. However, they still contain information, since the structure of a lipid informs us about the genes that were required to make it. For instance, more than a dozen genes are involved in the synthesis of cholesterol. Thus, the detection of cholesterol indicates the presence of organisms with these genes. The carbon and hydrogen in lipids (as in DNA, RNA, and protein) also contains isotopic information that can tell us about the physiology of the organism from which it derives. But most importantly, lipids are stable: they can be preserved in rocks for billions of years.

The study of these molecules in modern environments, in the laboratory, and in ancient rocks can help to answer  questions related to the coevolution of life and the Earth. What were the first ecosystems like? What were the first metabolic cycles? How can we better understand the evolutionary history of microbial life? What molecular and isotopic records are preserved in the rock record, and how can we interpret them? How do lipids reflect environmental parameters, such as temperature? How has the Earth's carbon cycle changed over geologic time, and what are the important contributions to it? Organic Biogeochemistry seeks to answer these questions.
	