---
layout: publication
title: Bradley2013EPSL
category: journalpub
permalink: /publications/Bradley2013EPSL
author: 
 - Bradley, A.S. 
 - Leavitt, W.D. 
 - Schmidt, M. 
 - Knoll, A.H.
 - Girguis, P.R.
 - Johnston, D.T. 
pubtitle: "Patterns of microbial sulfur isotope fractionation at low sulfate concentrations" 
journal: in review 
year: 2013
publink: 
---
Studies of microbial sulfate reduction have suggested that the magnitude of sulfur isotope fractionation varies as a step function of ambient sulfate concentration, with a critical threshold at roughly two hundred micromolar (Habicht et al. 2002, 2005). This threshold concentration has been interpreted as an upper bound on the sulfate concentration in Archean seawater, given low sulfur isotope fractionations preserved in sedimentary rocks of this age (Habicht et al. 2002). Here we examined S-isotope fractionation in two strains of sulfate-reducing bacteria grown under continuous culture conditions between 0.1 and 6 mM sulfate. The relationship between S-isotopic fractionation and sulfate abundance was observed to be strain-specific and highly variable. Desulfovibrio vulgaris str. Hildenborough cultures showed a large and relatively constant isotope fractionation (~25‰) between sulfate and sulfide over the aforementioned sulfate concentrations, whereas Desulfovibrio alaskensis G20 exhibited fractionations ranging from 2‰ to 15‰, correlating linearly with sulfate concentration. Together these data reveal that fractionation can vary as a function of concentration for some strains, even at sulfate concentrations well above thresholds typical of cellular half-saturation (Ks) constants. While the ratio of sulfate concentration to Ks is likely to be an important factor in determining sulfur isotope fractionation, these data suggest that the realized fractionation can be significantly influenced by other physiological factors such as sulfate uptake mechanism(s) or the chemical species of electron donor, which must also be considered when interpreting environmental sulfur isotope ratios.